astro-ph/0511239 [abs, ps, pdf, other] :

          Title: The BATSE-Swift luminosity and redshift distributions of
          short-duration GRBs
          Authors: Dafne Guetta, Tsvi Piran
          We  compare  the luminosity function and rate inferred from the
          BATSE  short hard bursts (SHBs) peak flux distribution with the
          redshift  and  luminosity  distributions  of  SHBs  observed by
          Swift/HETE   II.   While   the  Swift/HETE  II  SHB  sample  is
          incompatible   with   SHB  population  that  follows  the  star
          formation rate, it is compatible with a SHB rate that reflect a
          distribution  of  delay  times after the SFR. This would be the
          case  if  SHBs are associated with binary neutron star mergers.
          The  available data allows, however, different interpretations.
          For  example,  a  population  whose  rate is independent of the
          redshift fits the data very well. The implied SHB rates that we
          find range from $\sim 8$ to $\sim
          30h_{70}^3$Gpc$^{-3}$yr$^{-1}$. This is a much higher rate than
          what  was previously estimated. A detailed (2 dimensional) look
          at the best fit models shows, however, some discrepancy between
          the four Swift/HETE II SHBs and the models based on BATSE SHBs.
          This  could  be  a  statistical fluke. It could also arise from
          wrong  estimates  of  the triggering criteria or from selection
          effects.  If  real  it  may  indicate  the existence of two SHB
          populations  with  different  luminosity functions and redshift
          distributions.


  
astro-ph/0511242 [abs, ps, pdf, other] :

          Title:  Three-Body  Kick  to  a Bright Quasar out of Its Galaxy
          During a Merger
          Authors: Loren Hoffman, Abraham Loeb (Harvard U.)
          Comments: 13 pages, 2 figures, submitted to Nature
          The  quasar HE0450-2958 was recently discovered to reside ~7kpc
          away  from  a  galaxy  that  was  likely  disturbed by a recent
          merger.  The  lack  of  a  massive spheroid of stars around the
          quasar  raised  the unlikely suggestion that it may have formed
          in  a  dark galaxy. Here we explain this discovery as a natural
          consequence  of  a  dynamical kick imparted to the quasar as it
          interacted  with  a  binary  black  hole system during a galaxy
          merger  event.  The  typical stalling radius (~1pc) for a ~10^9
          solar  mass binary provides a kick of order the escape velocity
          of  the stellar spheroid, bringing the quasar out to around the
          observed radius before it turns around. This is consistent with
          the  observed  low relative velocity between the quasar and the
          merger-remnant  galaxy.  The  gas  carried  with the black hole
          throughout  the three-body interaction fuels the quasar for the
          duration of its journey, ~2x10^7 years. Gravitational radiation
          recoil could not have produced the required kick.


  
astro-ph/0511245 [abs, ps, pdf, other] :

          Title:  Possible  evidence  for  the ejection of a supermassive
          black hole from an ongoing merger of galaxies
          Authors:  Martin  G.  Haehnelt  (IoA), Melvyn B. Davies (Lund),
          Martin J. Rees (IoA)
          Comments: 4 pages, LaTeX, no figures; MNRAS in press
          Attempts  of  Magain  et al (2005) to detect the host galaxy of
          the  bright  QSO  HE0450--2958  have  not  been  successful. We
          suggest  that  the supermassive black hole powering the QSO was
          ejected from the observed ULIRG at the same redshift and at 1.5
          arcsec distance. Ejection could have either be caused by recoil
          due  to gravitational wave emission from a coalescing binary of
          supermassive  black  holes  or  the  gravitational slingshot of
          three or more supermassive black holes in the ongoing merger of
          galaxies  which  triggered the starburst activity in the ULIRG.
          We  discuss implications for the possible hierarchical build-up
          of  supermassive  black  holes from intermediate and/or stellar
          mass   black   holes,  and  for  the  detection  of  coalescing
          supermassive binary black holes by LISA.


  
astro-ph/0511246 [abs, ps, pdf, other] :

          Title:  Rotational  Broadening of Atomic Spectral Features from
          Neutron Stars
          Authors: P. Chang, S. Morsink, L. Bildsten, I. Wasserman
          Comments: 4 pages, 4 figures, to appear in ApJ Letters
          The  discovery of the first gravitationally redshifted spectral
          line from a neutron star (NS) by Cottam, Paerels and Mendez has
          triggered  theoretical  studies  of  the physics of atomic line
          formation  in  NS  atmospheres.  Chang,  Bildsten and Wasserman
          showed  that  the hydrogenic Fe H$\alpha$ line formed above the
          photosphere  of  a  bursting  NS is intrinsically broad. We now
          include  rotational  broadening  within  general relativity and
          compare  the  resulting  profile to that observed during Type I
          bursts  from  EXO  0748-676.  We  show  that the fine structure
          splitting  of the line precludes a meaningful constraint on the
          radius.  Our  fitting of the data show that the line forming Fe
          column    is    ${\rm    log}_{10}    (N_{\rm   Fe,   n=2}/{\rm
          cm^{-2}})=17.9_{-0.42}^{+0.27}$ and gravitational redshift $1+z
          =1.345_{-0.008}^{+0.005}$ with 95% confidence. We calculate the
          detectability  of  this  spectral  feature for a large range of
          spins  and  inclinations  assuming that the emission comes from
          the  entire  surface.  We find that at 300 (600) Hz only 10-20%
          (5-10%)  of  NSs  would  have spectral features as deep as that
          seen in EXO 0748-676.


  
astro-ph/0511247 [abs, ps, pdf, other] :

          Title:  Exposing  the Nuclear Burning Ashes of Radius Expansion
          Type I X-ray Bursts
          Authors:  Nevin  N.  Weinberg  (Caltech,  KITP),  Lars Bildsten
          (KITP, UCSB), Hendrik Schatz (MSU, JINA)
          Comments: 15 pages, 15 figures (emulateapj), accepted to ApJ
          We  solve  for  the  evolution  of  the  vertical extent of the
          convective  region of a neutron star atmosphere during a Type I
          X-ray  burst. The convective region is well-mixed with ashes of
          nuclear  burning and its extent determines the rise time of the
          burst  light  curve.  Using a full nuclear reaction network, we
          show  that the maximum vertical extent of the convective region
          during   photospheric  radius  expansion  (RE)  bursts  can  be
          sufficiently  great that: (1) some ashes of burning are ejected
          by  the radiation driven wind during the RE phase and, (2) some
          ashes  of  burning  are  exposed  at  the  neutron star surface
          following the RE phase. We find that ashes with mass number A ~
          30  -  60  are mixed in with the ejected material. We calculate
          the  expected  column  density  of ejected and surface ashes in
          hydrogen-like states and determine the equivalent widths of the
          resulting  photoionization edges from both the wind and neutron
          star  surface.  We  find  that  these can exceed 100 eV and are
          potentially  detectable.  A  detection  would probe the nuclear
          burning processes and might enable a measurement of the neutron
          star  gravitational  redshift.  In  addition,  we  find that in
          bursts with pure helium burning layers, protons from (alpha, p)
          reactions  cause  a  rapid onset of the 12C(p, gamma)13N(alpha,
          p)16O  reaction  sequence. The sequence bypasses the relatively
          slow  12C(alpha, gamma)16O reaction and leads to a sudden surge
          in  energy production that is directly observable as a rapid (~
          ms) increase in flux during burst rise.


  
astro-ph/0511254 [abs, ps, pdf, other] :

          Title: The Local Rate and the Progenitor Lifetime of Short-Hard
          Gamma-Ray Bursts: Synthesis and Predictions for LIGO
          Authors: Ehud Nakar, Avishay Gal-Yam, Derek B. Fox
          The  properties  of the short-hard gamma-ray bursts (SHBs) with
          known  host-galaxies  suggest  that  these events result from a
          long-lived progenitor system. The most popular progenitor model
          of  SHBs invokes the merger of either double neutron star (DNS)
          binaries  or  neutron  star-black  hole  (NS-BH)  systems. Such
          events  produce  strong  gravitational waves (GWs) at frequency
          range   that  is  accessible  to  current  and  next-generation
          ground-based  GW  observatories.  In  this  work we combine the
          census of SHB observations with refined theoretical analysis to
          critically  evaluate  the  compact  binary progenitor model. We
          then explore the implications for GW detection of these events.
          Beginning  from the measured star-formation rate through cosmic
          time,  we  consider  what  intrinsic  luminosity  and  lifetime
          distributions  can  reproduce  both the known SHB redshifts and
          luminosities, and the peak flux distribution of the large BATSE
          SHB  sample.  We  find  that (1) Short progenitor lifetimes, <3
          Gyr,  are ruled out, and lifetimes of about 6 Gyr favored. This
          result  is  difficult to reconcile with the observed properties
          of  the  DNS  population  in  our  galaxy. We show that for DNS
          systems to remain viable SHB progenitors, a large population of
          old  undetectable  NS  binaries must be postulated. (2) We find
          that  the  local  rate  of SHBs is at least 10 Gpc^-3 yr^-1 and
          likely as high as 10^5 Gpc^-3 yr-1, significantly above earlier
          estimates.  (3)  We find that assuming that SHBs do result from
          compact   binaries,  either  through  the  old  DNS  population
          mentioned   above   or   from   NS-BH  mergers,  our  resulting
          predictions  for the LIGO event rate are extremely encouraging:
          several   detections   per  year  may  be  expected  at  design
          sensitivity,   and   the   first   coincident   observation  of
          electromagnetic  and  gravitational  radiation  from an SHB may
          well be made with current facilities.


  
astro-ph/0511258 [abs, ps, pdf, other] :

          Title: Binary and Millisecond Pulsars
          Authors: D.R. Lorimer
          Comments:  77 pages, 30 figures, available on-line at this http
          URL
          Journal-ref: Living Rev. Relativity 8, (2005), 7
          We review the main properties, demographics and applications of
          binary  and  millisecond  radio pulsars. Our knowledge of these
          exciting  objects has greatly increased in recent years, mainly
          due  to  successful surveys which have brought the known pulsar
          population   to   over  1700.  There  are  now  80  binary  and
          millisecond pulsars associated with the disk of our Galaxy, and
          a  further 103 pulsars in 24 of the Galactic globular clusters.
          Recent  highlights  have  been  the discovery of the first ever
          double  pulsar  system  and  a  recent flurry of discoveries in
          globular clusters, in particular Terzan 5.


  
astro-ph/0511264 [abs, ps, pdf, other] :

          Title:  Astrometric  Light-Travel  Time signature of sources in
          nonlinear motion
          Authors: Guillem Anglada, Jordi Torra
          Comments: 10 pages, 2 figures
          Context:Very  precise  planned  space  astrometric missions and
          recent  improvements on imaging capabilities require a detailed
          review of the assumptions of classical astrometric modeling.
          Aims:We  show that Light-Travel Time must be taken into account
          to  model  the  kinematics of astronomical objects in nonlinear
          motion, even at stellar distances.
          Methods:A closed expression to include Light-Travel Time in the
          actual  astrometric  models  with nonlinear motion is provided.
          Using   a   perturbative   approach   the   expression  of  the
          Light-Travel  Time signature is derived. We propose a practical
          form  of the astrometric modelling to be applied in astrometric
          data reduction of sources at stellar distances($d>1 pc$).
          Results  :We  show  that  the  Light-Travel  Time  signature is
          relevant  at  $\muas$  accuracy (or even at $mas$) depending on
          the  time  span of the astrometric measurements. We explain how
          information  about  the  radial  motion  of  a  source  can  be
          obtained. Some estimative numbers are provided for known nearby
          binary systems
          Conclusions  :In the light of the obtained results, it is clear
          that  this  effect  must be taken into account to interpret any
          kind   of  precise  astrometric  measurements.  The  effect  is
          particularly  interesting  in  measurements  performed  by  the
          planned   astrometric   space  missions  (GAIA,  SIM,  JASMINE,
          TPF/DARWIN).  Finally  an  objective  criterion  is provided to
          quickly  evaluate  whether  the  Light-Travel  Time modeling is
          required for a given source or system.


  
astro-ph/0511270 [abs, ps, pdf, other] :

          Title: Observation of V0332+53 over the 2004/2005 outburst with
          Integral
          Authors:  I. Kreykenbohm, N. Mowlavi, K. Pottschmidt, J. Wilms,
          S.  E.  Shaw,  R.  E.  Rothschild,  N.  Produit,  W. Coburn, P.
          Kretschmar, A. Santangelo, R. Staubert
          Comments:  2  pages, 2 figures. To appear in the proceedings of
          "The  X-ray Universe 2005", San Lorenzo de El Escorial (Spain),
          26-30   September   2005,   from  a  detailed  paper  (Mowlavi,
          Kreykenbohm, Shaw et al) submitted to A&A in September 2005
          We  present the spectral and temporal analysis of the 2004/2005
          outburst  of  the  transient  X-ray pulsar V0332+53 as observed
          with  Integral. After the discovery of the third cyclotron line
          in  phase averaged spectra (Kreykenbohm et al 2005, Pottschmidt
          et   al  2005),  detailed  pulse  phase  spectroscopy  revealed
          remarkably  little  variability  of the cyclotron lines through
          the  4.4s  X-ray  pulse  (Pottschmidt  et  al 2005). During the
          decline  of  the  outburst,  the  flux  was  observed  to decay
          exponentially  until  2005  Feb 10 and linearly thereafter. The
          spectrum  was  found  to  become  harder  with  time, while the
          folding energy remained constant. The energy of the fundamental
          cyclotron  line  increased  with  time from 26.5kev in the RXTE
          observation  up  to 29.5kev in the last Integral one indicating
          that the emission region is moving closer to the surface of the
          neutron  star.  For  a  detailed  analysis,  see  Mowlavi et al
          (2005).


  
astro-ph/0511276 [abs, pdf] :

          Title: Investigating Galaxy Evolution with Chandra
          Authors: G. Fabbiano
          Comments:  To  be  included  in  the  proceedings of the 'X-ray
          universe  2005  meeting'  held  in  San  Lorenzo de El Escorial
          (Spain), 26-30 Sep 2005
          Chandra  observations show the importance of the X-ray band for
          studying the evolution of galaxies. Binary X-ray sources are an
          easily  detectable  tracer  of  the stellar population. Chandra
          studies  of  these  populations are giving us insights into the
          nature  and  formation of these binaries, and provide the basis
          for   diagnostics   of   galaxy  evolution.  With  Chandra  and
          XMM-Newton  we  can  explore relatively poorly known aspects of
          the black hole population of the universe: ultra-luminous X-ray
          sources,  that may be connected with the 'missing' intermediate
          mass  black  holes  predicted  by hierarchical galaxy and black
          hole  formation  scenarios;  and quiescent supermassive nuclear
          black  holes and their surroundings, as a way to understand the
          full  range  of  the  AGN  phenomenon.  Finally, the X-ray band
          provides  the  only  way  to  explore  hot plasmas in galaxies;
          recent  observations  are  revealing  the  importance  of these
          plasmas as vehicles of both chemical enrichment and energy.


  
Cross-listings

  
Replacements

  
astro-ph/0508257 [abs, pdf] :

          Title:  The discovery of PSR J1833-1034 : the pulsar associated
          with the supernova remnant G21.5-0.9
          Authors: Y. Gupta, D. Mitra, D.A. Green, A. Acharyya
          Comments:  5  pages,  with  1  figure and 1 table; published in
          Current Science
          Journal-ref: Current Science, Vol. 89, No. 5, 10 September 2005
          Note:  replaced  with  revised version Wed, 9 Nov 2005 05:41:04
          GMT (217kb)

  
